JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff. Gwen Ifill is
away.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: As
world leaders gather at the
United Nations, from the U.S.
to Russia, how to end the war
in Syria tops the agenda.
Also ahead, Margaret Warner
talks with the president of
Egypt on how to bring down the
Islamic State.
Plus:
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate: There will be major
tax reductions.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's Politics
Monday. Donald Trump unveils his
tax plan. And Hillary Clinton
keeps on answering questions
about her handling of e-mails.
Then: NASA solves one of the
greatest mysteries of Mars,
discovering rivers of water on
the
Red PlanetMD-BO .
All that and more on
tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Obama
and Russian President Vladimir
Putin went to the United
Nations today, where they laid
out starkly different visions on
the future of Syria.
The two men addressed world
leaders, disagreeing openly on
whether Syrian President Bashar
al-Assad must go or stay. Later,
they met privately. We will get
a full report on developments
at the start of this big week at
the U.N. after the news summary.
In other news, Wall Street had a
bad Monday over new signs of
weakness in China's economy
and falling oil prices. The Dow
Jones industrial average lost
nearly 313 points to close back
near 16000, down about 2
percent. The Nasdaq fell 142
points, or 3 percent. And the
S&P
500 dropped 49, 2.5 percent.
As the U.S. focused on Syria at
the U.N., the Taliban scored a
major coup in Afghanistan.
Hundreds of fighters attacked
and captured the city of Kunduz,
a provincial capital in
the north. The Taliban militants
took cell phone video of
themselves after this seizure
of a major Afghan city for the
first time since the U.S.
invasion in 2001.
MAN (through translator): This
is our hope. We want to build a
religious school, to build
a bridge, a road, a Sharia-based
government. This is why we came
out and this is what we
fought for, so that Sharia
law is enforced here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For more on the
fall of Kunduz and its
significance, I spoke earlier
this
evening to freelance journalist
Sune Engel Rasmussen in Kabul.
Sune, welcome.
Tell us what happened. How did
the Taliban pull this off?
SUNE ENGEL RASMUSSEN, Freelance
Journalist: Well, this is an
attack that started around
3:00 a.m. in the morning, and
the Taliban attacked the city of
Kunduz from four different
districts, three different
directions around, surrounding
the city.
And around mid-morning, they
captured the regional hospital
in the city. And early in
the afternoon, they'd taken the
intelligence service
headquarters, they had taken and
released
hundreds of prisoners. And they
had also set fire to a U.N.
building.
So, this seems to be a very
concerted effort by militant
groups from not just Kunduz, but
different provinces as well, and
something that had been weeks,
if not months, in the
making.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why was Kunduz
in such a vulnerable position?
SUNE ENGEL RASMUSSEN: That's a
good question, but mainly -- one
of the main reasons is the
withdrawal of foreign troops.
The German troops were the main
force up there. They pulled
out two years ago. And, since
then, the government has had a
really hard time establishing
authority
and getting people on their
side, not least -- Kunduz is a
place where a lot of the
opposition,
militant opposition to the
Taliban relies on militia
leaders and former warlords, who
don't necessarily have a lot of
backing from their population,
because they have a reputation
of abusing the local population.
And that is something that
creates a fertile ground for an
insurgency like the Taliban.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, quickly, how
much a threat does this pose to
the central government in
Kabul?
SUNE ENGEL RASMUSSEN: Well, that
depends on how long the Taliban
is able to hold Kunduz.
And I'll be surprised if the
government forces are not able
to push them out relatively
quickly.
But, that said, Kunduz is a
strategically important city.
It's at a crossroads between
the northern provinces and is a
gateway to Tajikistan. And it
also has highways connecting
the province to Kabul and to
Mazar, north of those two
cities. So, it is a
strategically
very important province.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sune Engel
Rasmussen, reporting for us from
Kabul, we thank you.
SUNE ENGEL RASMUSSEN:
You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Yemen,
security officials charged that
airstrikes led by Saudi Arabia
killed at least 38 people at a
wedding party today. It happened
in a town near the port
city of Mocha on the country's
southwestern coast. The Saudis
are running an air campaign
against Shiite rebels in Yemen,
but they denied hitting a
wedding party. A spokesman said,
"This is totally false news."
Pope Francis is back in Rome
after his U.S. visit, but he
kept making news even as he
flew home last night. Speaking
to reporters in Italian, he
condemned bishops who helped
hide the sexual abuse
of children by priests.
POPE FRANCIS, Leader of Catholic
Church (through translator):
When a priest abuses a child,
it is very bad. He crushes them
with evil. And for that reason,
it is almost a sacrilege.
He has betrayed his vocation,
the call of God. And, also, one
shouldn't cover it up.
The ones who covered these
things up are also guilty.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The pope also
defended the consoling words he
offered to U.S. bishops
last week over the abuse
scandal. He said he wanted to
acknowledge that they had
suffered,
too.
Prosecutors in Germany today
opened a fraud investigation of
Volkswagen's former CEO over
cheating on emission tests.
Martin Winterkorn resigned last
week as the scandal burst to
life. Separately, German
government officials insisted
that they had been unaware that
V.W.'s
data was falsified.
Back in this country, the U.S.
Senate voted to break a deadlock
over funding government
operations into December. That's
after Republicans gave up trying
to pass a bill that also denied
funding for Planned Parenthood.
The House is expected to follow
suit this week.
Royal Dutch/Shell is abandoning
its search for oil in Alaska's
Arctic waters, at least
for now. The company spent $7
billion on drilling in the
Chukchi Sea, but says it didn't
find
enough oil to make it
worthwhile. Environmentalists
had condemned the project,
saying that a spill
would devastate
wildlife in the region.
And there's hopeful news for
women in the early stages of
breast cancer. The National
Cancer Institute reports that a
gene test can determine which
patients are helped more
by hormone therapy. Those who
skipped traditional
chemotherapy, based on that
test, had less
than a 1 percent chance of their
cancer recurring over five
years.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
world leaders grapple with what
to do in Syria; Margaret
Warner sits down with the
president of Egypt; Donald Trump
unveils his tax plan; NASA finds
rivers of water on
Mars, and much more.
How to end the war in Syria,
that was the key question today
at the United Nations.
It's a conflict that's left
thousands dead, displacing
millions more, with ripple
effects
across the Middle
East and Europe.
Our chief foreign affairs
correspondent, Margaret Warner,
is there, and she has this
report.
MARGARET WARNER: One hundred and
sixty world leaders filled the
General Assembly hall this
morning to celebrate the 70th
anniversary of the organization
dedicated to preserving
peace in the world.
But the speeches of President
Obama and Russian President
Vladimir Putin only highlighted
the ongoing tensions between
two of its founding members.
Mr. Obama spoke first,
with an ominous warning.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: We come together
today knowing that the march
of human progress never travels
in a straight line, that our
work is far from complete,
that dangerous currents risk
pulling us back into a darker,
more disordered world.
MARGARET WARNER: It was an
indirect reference, both to the
rise of the Islamic State and
to what the U.S. sees as
adventuresome by Russia, Syria
and Iran.
He rejected the Russian argument
that supporting Syrian President
Bashar al-Assad is the price
for fighting ISIS.
BARACK OBAMA: The United States
is prepared to work with any
nation, including Russia
and Iran, to resolve the
conflict. But we must recognize
that there cannot be, after
so much bloodshed, so much
carnage, a return to the prewar
status quo.
MARGARET WARNER: Later, Putin,
who appeared at the U.N. event
for the first time in a
decade, flatly disagreed. He
said there's only one way to end
the brutal conflict in
Syria and defeat ISIS.
VLADIMIR PUTIN, Russian
President (through translator):
We think it is an enormous
mistake
to refuse to cooperate with the
Syrian government and its armed
forces, who are valiantly
fighting
terrorism face to face. We
should finally acknowledge that
no one but President Assad's
armed forces and Kurd militia
are truly fighting the Islamic
State and other terrorist
organizations
in Syria.
MARGARET WARNER: Putin is
already engaged in a major
military buildup in Syria, and
he's now struck an
intelligence-sharing deal with
Syria, Iran and Iraq, which came
as a
surprise to the White House. He
called today for a broad global
coalition against terror,
and he rejected criticism of
Russia's new activism on the
world stage.
VLADIMIR PUTIN (through
translator): I must note that
such an honest and direct
approach
of Russia has been recently used
as a pretext to accuse it of
growing ambitions, as if those
who say it had no ambitions at
all. However, it is not the
matter of Russia's ambitions,
but the recognition of the fact
that we can no longer tolerate
the current state of affairs
in the world.
MARGARET WARNER: Iranian
President Hassan Rouhani
likewise defended his country's
actions
in Iraq and Syria, where Tehran
is actively aiding Assad, and he
blamed American policy
for forcing Iran to act.
HASSAN ROUHANI, Iranian
President (through translator):
We must not forget that the
roots
of today's destruction can be
found in the occupation,
invasion and military
intervention
of yesterday. If we didn't have
the U.S. military invasion of
Afghanistan and Iraq, the
terrorists
wouldn't have an excuse for the
justification of their crimes.
MARGARET WARNER: The flash point
in Ukraine also figured large in
the dueling speeches.
President Obama condemned Russia
for flagrantly violating
Ukraine's sovereignty.
BARACK OBAMA: If that happens
without consequence in Ukraine,
it could happen to any nation
gathered here today. That is the
basis of the sanctions that the
United States and our
partners impose on Russia. It is
not a desire to return to a cold
war.
MARGARET WARNER: But Putin shot
back that the root of the
problem is American arrogance.
VLADIMIR PUTIN (through
translator): We all know that,
after the end of the Cold War,
a single center of domination
emerged in the world. And then
those who found themselves
at the top of that pyramid were
tempted to think that, if we are
so strong and exceptional,
then we know better
than anyone what to do.
MARGARET WARNER: Obama and
Putin's speeches were a public
preview of a private meeting
later, their first direct
sit-down in nearly a year.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Margaret
Warner joins me now.
So, Margaret, how far apart are
these two powerful leaders in
how they approach the
world?
MARGARET WARNER: Well, I think
quite different, Judy, even
though if you just arrived from
Mars and you read their
speeches, you would think both
were talking about having a very
orderly and cooperative world.
But not only as you heard in the
speeches did they have very
different views of Ukraine
and Syria, how we got to the
point where we are in both
countries, but, you know, what
the solutions are. The
difference was that President
Obama talked a lot about how a
strong
nation is actually forced to do
diplomacy abroad, and, at home,
its citizens to its
freedoms -- or accepts the facts
that its citizens have freedoms,
and it's a weak leader
and a weak country that asserts
itself abroad sort of
unilaterally and represses
dissent
at home.
It was an obvious dig at Putin.
And he said, in the end, that is
a recipe for essentially
a disorderly world. Now, Putin
didn't talk at all of course
about human rights or any
sort of broad topics like that.
He also talked about wanting to
cooperate, but he just didn't,
I would say, try to offer an
alternative vision, other than
vague statements about
cooperation.
And, in fact, they clearly, in
their actions, are dealing very
differently with almost every
conflict you see
around the world.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we know, as
you just mentioned, Putin's --
has forces. He's beefing
up his forces in Syria. But in
addition, we now know the
Russians have arranged this
intelligence
gathering arrangement with Iran
and with Assad in Syria. What is
the U.S. saying about that?
MARGARET WARNER: Well,
they're very concerned.
And the other player in this, by
the way, Judy, is Iraq. So,
those four countries are
going to share intelligence on
ISIS. And when this first came
out yesterday, the United
States was completely
blindsided. They had no idea. No
one alerted them. So, it was
clearly
-- it's like Putin and the rest
of them are trying to set up a
rival sort of anti-ISIS
coalition.
And what worries the United
States is, it adds to the U.S.
worries, which is, what is
Putin really up to? In other
words, has he sent forces to
Syria to fight ISIS, or is
it really to prop up Assad and
help Assad wipe out all internal
opposition, whether
they're terrorists or not?
So this just adds to the sort of
basket of worries that the
United States has about the
situation in Syria. Now, others
would argue of course that
President Obama declined to
get very involved in Syria, and
Russia has stepped into a void,
essentially, a sort of
external leadership. Wherever
you come down on that argument,
the U.S. is very, very
concerned.
Now, to us, members of the
administration said, oh, well.
One said to me very low-level
intelligence officers. And
another side, oh, Iraq is a
sovereign country. They can do
whatever
they want, even though the U.S.
is in there really trying to
save Iraq's bacon, retraining
its military, giving them air
support in their attacks on
ISIS.
But, I mean, those ring a little
hollow. I mean, the United
Kingdom as an ally wouldn't
do something like this without
telling Washington, for example.
So, Iraq may be a sovereign
country,
but I think that's what stunned
them the most, the U.S.
officials, that Iraq is part of
this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Margaret,
given all this, what were the
expectations going into this
meeting between President Obama
and Putin? We assume it's still
going on.
MARGARET WARNER: Yes.
And, apparently I mean, I wasn't
there, and just a couple of
reporters and photographers.
They have a stony handshake. The
expectations were low, very low
on the U.S. part, because
meetings between Secretary Kerry
and Prime Minister Lavrov had
not yielded -- including
here in New York -- had not
yielded any greater insight into
what the Russians are up to.
When they use words like frank,
you know what that means. And
nor have there been any really
private assurances. And then, of
course, there was no sense of
give, except that President
Obama said in his speech today,
we are willing to work with
Russia and Iran.
So, in that sense, you have seen
the U.S. move a little -- you
know, open the door,
that they would like to have
Russia part of this anti-ISIS
coalition. But their
expectations
were quite low going into it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, a lot to
watch, Margaret Warner, who will
be in New York the rest of
the week following the goings-on
at the U.N. Thank you.
MARGARET WARNER:
Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Donald Trump
announces his plan to cut taxes,
Hillary Clinton embarks
on a new campaign strategy, and
Speaker Boehner steps down, but
the problems of Congress still
remain, a perfect time
for Politics Monday.
I'm joined by Tamara Keith of
NPR and Amy Walter of The Cook
Political Report.
And welcome to you both.
So, let's start with Donald
Trump. He did, finally today,
unveil this tax reform plan.
Eliminate taxes for, what,
millions of people, cut taxes
for some of the highest income
earners.
Let's listen to a little bit of
what he said at this
announcement today.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate: We will run this
country properly. There is
so much money to be saved. We're
reducing taxes, but, at the same
time, if I win, if
I become president, we will be
able to cut so much money. And I
have a better fact. We
won't be losing anything, other
than we will be balancing
budgets and getting them where
they should be.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Amy, what was
the reaction to this today in
political and economic circles?
Is this a plan that is likely to
gain him support from voters?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Well, I have dubbed this
the Oprah tax plan. It's
a little bit like, you get a tax
cut and you get a tax cut and
you get a tax cut. Everybody
gets something.
But, unlike Oprah, we don't
really know where the money is
coming from. I know Oprah can
pay for all the things that she
gives away. This is a tax plan,
though, that did get some
conservatives with a thumbs-up,
people like David Norquist, who
is a very influential
Republican conservative
tax-fighter, just doesn't want
to see any tax increases ever.
Even the Club for Growth, who
has come out and criticized
Donald Trump, saying that they
don't think he's conservative
enough, that he has hiked taxes
in the past or at least
-- I'm sorry -- he has advocated
hiking taxes, even they had to
concede.
I think Donald Trump is doing
two things here. The first is,
he's pushing back on the
argument
against him that he is not
strong enough on policy, he's
not doing enough to talk
specifics,
and, number two, pushing back on
this theme that people like Club
for Growth have argued
that he's not a serious
conservative, that he's not a
real Republican. This tax plan
helps to push back on both.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we know part
of it, a lot of tax cuts, but
there is taking away the
so-called carried interest favor
that's been given to some of the
hedge funds folks in
New York.
But, Tamara, how does this
compare to what other
Republicans have been saying
about what
they would do about taxes?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: In some ways, it's on
steroids.
It's like the Jeb plan on
steroids. He is lowering the
business tax rate, the corporate
tax rate to 15 percent, and in
addition to cutting it from the
35 percent that it currently
is, he also would take freelance
income, he would take small
businesses that currently
pay taxes at the individual tax
rate, all of that would get
pushed over and put on the
corporate tax rate at 15
percent, which Grover Norquist,
the anti-tax crusader, said was
ambitious and bold.
And the reality is, this is a
pretty specific plan. It
includes a lot of details, new
tax
code, new tax brackets on the
personal income side, a zero
percent bracket where he -- in
the plan itself, it says that
there will be a page that you
just fill out that says, "I
win."
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: But we do now
know a little bit more, Amy,
about where he's coming from
on economics from this, right?
At least it fills in some of
that picture.
AMY WALTER: Yes, sure. It says
he wants to give everybody a
little bit of something.
He says he's going to pay for it
by closing these tax loopholes,
which most economists
say is not going to be possible.
But we also know that he wants
to do a lot of other spending,
but we also don't know
where that's coming from,
building a wall across the
border of Mexico, humanely
rounded
up immigrants, as he said the
other night, having a health
care plan that's not Obamacare,
but will cover everybody. It's
not clear where that money is
coming from.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, well,
let's talk -- we have talked
about Donald Trump, one
of the Republicans.
Let's talk about Hillary
Clinton. Tamara, he was -- she
was -- I guess her campaign
has decided she's going to give
more interviews. We have seen
her popping up on different news
programs. And everywhere she
goes, she's being asked about
the e-mails. It was no different
yesterday on "Meet the Press."
Chuck Todd asked her some
questions.
Here's part of that exchange.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate: There
are some things about this that
I just
can't control. I can't control
the technical aspects of it. I
am not by any means a technical
expert. I relied on people who
were. My assumption was anything
that I sent to a dot-gov account
would be captured.
CHUCK TODD, Moderator, "Meet the
Press": But that's very
difficult to capture all of your
e-mails by going to perhaps
thousands of people in their
dot-gov accounts. It would have
a
lot been easier if it was
sent to your dot-gov account.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Well,
but when you communicate with
people in other parts of
the government, you're not
sending it to the
StateDepartment.gov. And that
would have been
true either way.
Look, I think I have done all
that I can to take
responsibility, to be as
transparent
as possible.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Tamara, he
didn't -- what I know people are
saying about this interview
is, she doesn't seem as
impatient with these questions
as she has in the past.
TAMARA KEITH: She looks very
relaxed, like I'm going to sit
here...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Almost happy
to be getting questions.
TAMARA KEITH: ... and I
am going to be relaxed.
(LAUGHTER)
TAMARA KEITH: And she was.
But Chuck asked her at some
point, is this just a drip,
drip, drip? And she said, yes,
this is a drip, drip, drip. And
this is going to drip, drip,
drip. There's going to be
another
release of e-mails of the State
Department later this week on
Wednesday.
And then come October 22, there
is going to be this big Benghazi
committee hearing. And
there is no telling whether
that's really going to be the
end of it. Odds are it won't
really be the end of it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But does her
campaign, Amy, think they just
have to slog through this
no matter what?
AMY WALTER: Yes, it's the -- and
you saw it both MD+IT MDNM in
her body language
and when she acknowledged the
drip, drip, drip. There is this
resignation to her fate,
that I don't control this, I
don't know what's going to come
of it.
All she can hope is two things,
one, that this stays in the
political realm. It doesn't
go in the legal realm, we don't
start talking about real serious
repercussions. And, two,
that eventually the media and
voters and the public get bored
with this story and it goes
away. But that's not anytime
soon, and certainly not before
the end of October.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, I can't let
the two of you get away without
asking about the big
news of last Friday. House
Speaker John Boehner announced
he is stepping down.
Yesterday , he did an interview
one of the Sunday shows with
John Dickerson on "Face
the Nation."
And we heard Boehner here spell
out who some of these
conservatives are who led to
this
decision. Here's part of that.
REP. JOHN BOEHNER (R-OH),
Speaker of the House: The Bible
says, beware of false prophets.
And there are people out there
spreading noise about how much
can get done. I mean, this
whole idea that we were going to
shut down the government to get
rid of Obamacare in
2013, this plan
never had a chance.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Tamara, we
hear what the speaker is saying.
He's been pretty blunt
there about -- is Kevin McCarthy
or somebody else -- who, by the
way, announced today he's
running for the speakership,
confirmed it. Are things going
to be different under his
leadership?
TAMARA KEITH: He's going to have
the same math problem that John
Boehner had, which
is, in the House, Republicans
can get what they want if they
all agree with each other.
Otherwise, they're going to have
to have some Democratic help.
And then it gets over to the
Senate, and they can't blast
through a filibuster. And then
it would go through the
Democratic president. And
there's no way a Democratic
president
is going to defund Planned
Parenthood or eliminate
Obamacare. So, they still have
the same fundamental
problem. Kevin McCarthy, I
think, has better relationship
with some of the most
conservative
members, but I don't know
how far that will go.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So,
what changes, Amy?
AMY WALTER: We just change --
literally, we change chairs, and
that's really about it.
I don't think we're going to see
much more out of a McCarthy
speakership than we would
out of a Boehner speakership.
The one question is, how much
does he accede to that
conservative
base? Does he say, fine, yes,
let's shut the government down
over the debt ceiling in
December,
yes, fine, let's go take more
stringent positions, force the
president's hand, which could
create,
of course, more gridlock, more
-- and we could have another
government shutdown, and we
could
get to the place where
Republicans, especially those
who want to win the White House
back,
say, this is damaging
us beyond repair.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But there is no
sign he's going to do some of
those things?
(CROSSTALK)
AMY WALTER: We don't know
what he's going to do.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
Well, that's why we have you
two here to explain it for us.
(CROSSTALK)
AMY WALTER: That's right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amy Walter,
Tamara Keith, thank you both.
TAMARA KEITH: Thanks, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Appreciate it.
Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": the
fight for girls to get a modern
education in the birthplace
of voodoo; and Miles O'Brien
helps us unravel a major mystery
of Mars.
But, first, Margaret Warner's
interview with Egyptian
President Abdel Fattah El-Sisi.
In 2013, when he was in charge
of Egypt's armed forces, Sisi
removed Egypt's first
democratically
elected president. He himself
was then elected to the post
last year. Egypt's struggles are
many, amid almost five years of
turmoil since the revolution
began in January 2011.
Margaret spoke with Sisi
yesterday morning in New York.
MARGARET WARNER: Mr. President,
thank you for joining us.
This past week, the big news was
that you released 100 political
prisoners, including
two prominent Al-Jazeera
journalists. Was the timing of
that dictated by the fact you
were coming here to the U.N.
General Assembly, to quiet all
the international criticism
there
has been of that?
ABDEL FATTAH EL-SISI, Egyptian
President (through translator):
The idea is very simple. Once
the legal procedures are over
and there is a possibility for
me to intervene and to issue
a pardon, I didn't hesitate.
MARGARET WARNER: In your system,
does a legal pardon mean that
you have concluded that the
charges -- that they were
innocent of the charges?
ABDEL FATTAH EL-SISI (through
translator): Once those are
over, the legal party allows
the president to intervene to
bring an end to this issue and
to this legal issue.
MARGARET WARNER: Well, now there
are still 18 journalists being
held, and, by conservative
estimates, 20,000 or more
political prisoners, many of
whom had been brought in on what
are
said to be trumped-up
terrorism charges.
Could you act and will you act
as swiftly once the legal
process is over?
ABDEL FATTAH EL-SISI (through
translator): It is very
important to stop at the word of
under detention.
There is no legal formality that
allows me to do so, but there
are court procedures force
that we can deal
with these cases.
MARGARET WARNER: So, the big
issue here at the U.N. General
Assembly is going to be the
fight against Islamic State,
and, in particular, focused on
Syria right now.
Now, the anti-ISIL coalition, of
which Egypt is a member, you
have been at it for a full
year, and yet ISIS has grown, if
anything, more powerful.
Something like 30,000 new
fighters,
foreign fighters, have
entered Syria. Why is that?
ABDEL FATTAH EL-SISI (through
translator): It's the idea that
we can fight ISIS only
militarily. This means the
strategy is incomplete. We need
a holistic approach that would
include
security dimensions, an economic
dimension, social and cultural
dimensions as well.
MARGARET WARNER: Egypt has not
been involved, except to bomb in
Libya, where some ISIS militants
have killed so many Christian
Copts from Egypt. Is Egypt going
to step up its military
engagement?
ABDEL FATTAH EL-SISI (through
translator): Egypt is one member
of the coalition. It has
been very clear since the onset
of the coalition that the
Egyptian role is confined now in
fighting terrorism in Sinai and
on the borders with Libya that
extends over 1,200 kilometers.
MARGARET WARNER: So more
in your neighborhood?
ABDEL FATTAH EL-SISI (through
translator): Yes, yes.
MARGARET WARNER: One more
question about the bigger
picture.
Do you share the view of Russia
and Iran that now is not the
time to unseat President Bashar
al-Assad or his government, as
long as the fight, the number
one fight is against ISIL?
ABDEL FATTAH EL-SISI (through
translator): We are for a
political solution, not a
military
solution, in Syria. We want to
preserve the integrity of the
Syrian territory and preserve
the Syrian national army.
We must confront the extremists
organizations and ISIS in Syria
to bring stability to the
situation. We must reconstruct
Syria to accommodate the
refugees back into their homes
now.
MARGARET WARNER: But do you
think that President Assad can
be part of the political
transition?
ABDEL FATTAH EL-SISI (through
translator): We need to focus on
the real threat, the extremism
and terrorism and its negative
ramifications and the huge
instability that can dominate
the Middle East and can spill
over to other regions as well.
MARGARET WARNER: But now there
is a big question about whether
Bashar Assad and his continued
presence and the way he's
treating all of his own people
is fueling ISIS. Do you agree
with that?
ABDEL FATTAH EL-SISI (through
translator): I believe that the
negotiations between the
Syrian opposition and the regime
should conclude that. We cannot
just be judgmental while we
are from the outside.
MARGARET WARNER: So, the
insurgency in Sinai, I recall,
when you came into power, after
President Morsi, you vowed that
you would clean that up in
months, that you're a military
man, that you would know how to
do this. And, instead, it is
growing. Why is that?
ABDEL FATTAH EL-SISI (through
translator): This is what
terrorism is, and this is not
a simple thing to confront. And
I guess the United States has a
long experience in countering
terrorism in many countries. And
despite all the capabilities of
the United States, the
United States took years in
trying to defeat these
terrorists.
But if we can compare the
security situation two years ago
and today, we find a lot of
improvement. But the question
is, will the flow of weapons and
foreign fighters across
the borders from Libya be
stopped? This flow poses threats
to us and a challenge to us.
MARGARET WARNER: Secretary Kerry
said this publicly in Cairo.
Senator John McCain has
said it, that the crackdown on
the Brotherhood in your country,
the further repression and
jailing of many, many dissidents
has, in fact, worsened this
problem and has radicalized
people in a way they
weren't before.
What do you say to that?
ABDEL FATTAH EL-SISI (through
translator): You cannot forget
that Egypt has been in a
state of revolution for five
years, and the Egyptian
resources are limited.
The state of affairs in Egypt
witnessed two revolutions in two
years. These have been
very difficult times for
Egyptians. And we have 90
million people. They need to
live.
At the end of the day, Egyptians
want to find their basic needs
provided and a better chance
for life. This cannot be
achieved while there is a state
of chaos. The standards that you
live by do not necessarily have
to apply to the standards that
we live in, in our own
countries.
We need some time in order to
reach the standards that you
live by.
MARGARET WARNER: I understand
that, but my question is, has
the crackdown really, ever
since you came into office,
including now under the
anti-terrorism law, actually
fueling
the insurgency in Egypt?
ABDEL FATTAH EL-SISI (through
translator): Undoubtedly, the
crackdown on the insurgents
and the terrorist members
decreased the insurgent
operations.
MARGARET WARNER: Decreased?
ABDEL FATTAH EL-SISI (through
translator): Decreased,
undoubtedly decreased the
terrorist
operations and terrorist
incidents. I'm saying to you,
terrorism cannot defeat a
country,
especially if its people are
unified in confrontation of
terrorism. This is what we find
in Egypt.
MARGARET WARNER: But, in fact,
the number of attacks has
increased, has it not?
ABDEL FATTAH EL-SISI (through
translator): No. This is not
true.
MARGARET WARNER: So you don't
think these critics could be
right?
ABDEL FATTAH EL-SISI (through
translator): Everybody has the
right to criticize. Everybody
has to present their own view.
But I'm just offering you our
perspective.
The reality is, if we turned to
Syria, Iraq or Libya, the
situation would have been much
more dangerous for the region
and for Europe. Of our 90
million people, 60 million are
young
people. Imagine if we are
suffering from that state of
chaos. What would the situation
be?
MARGARET WARNER: There is also
concern in Congress that
military equipment given to
Egypt, whether Apache
helicopters, Hellfire missiles,
are being used in these
anti-terrorist
operations, but in fact are
vaporizing entire villages in
Sinai, the attack on the Mexican
tourists in the Western Desert.
Can you ensure U.S. taxpayers
that in fact their gifts to
Egypt are not being used in
this way in the future?
ABDEL FATTAH EL-SISI (through
translator): Let me respond
about the incident, the
unfortunate
incident of the Mexican
tourists. That was a mistake.
They were in an off-limit area
very close to the border area
with Libya, dangerous areas,
where smugglers used to
infiltrate
with weapons and
foreign fighters.
As for Sinai, I want to assure
you that Egypt will never use
weapons or force against
innocent
civilians, because we will not
allow ourselves to kill innocent
civilians.
MARGARET WARNER: Let me turn to
Egypt-U.S. relations, because
the U.S. recently -- lift
the ban on military hardware to
Egypt. Is it back on track now,
the relationship? Do
you feel it has improved?
ABDEL FATTAH EL-SISI (through
translator): In comparison to
the last months, yes, it
has improved.
MARGARET WARNER: And what
more would you like to see?
ABDEL FATTAH EL-SISI (through
translator): We have started a
strategic dialogue with
the United States to review our
strategies and try to find ways
how to handle issues
of common interest
in a better way.
MARGARET WARNER: And do you
trust the United States as a
reliable ally?
ABDEL FATTAH EL-SISI (through
translator): Me? Undoubtedly. It
goes without saying. The
United States has never let us
down throughout the past years.
MARGARET WARNER: That's
quite a statement.
ABDEL FATTAH EL-SISI (through
translator): I just want to say
to you, though, that the
last two years presented a real
test of the endurance and
strength of the U.S.-Egyptian
strategic relationship.
MARGARET WARNER: Let me go back,
finally, to the state internally
in Egypt.
Can you explain to the American
people why so many young
pro-democracy activists have
been rounded up and put in
prison, sometimes for violating
the law that allows them --
doesn't
allow them to protest? It's hard
for Americans to understand.
ABDEL FATTAH EL-SISI (through
translator): It is true that
Americans won't understand
that easily, because they look
at us from the American
perspective.
But let me explain to them that
we didn't stop protests in
Egypt. We only regulated
the right of protesting in
Egypt. Many countries do. We do
not ban it, and we will not. We
only regulated it.
Why? Because we need stability.
We are not a rich country. This
country cannot afford
a state of instability.
MARGARET WARNER: And so you
think these young liberal
pro-democracy activists are a
threat
to that?
ABDEL FATTAH EL-SISI (through
translator): It is not a threat
to the country. They just
need to know that we cannot
leave in this state of affairs
forever. We need our country
to progress. We need to build
our country after years of
stagnant waters.
We have complete respect for the
liberal young people, but this
cannot be the only way people
judge Egypt.
MARGARET WARNER: People of every
age and stripe who got out in
Tahrir Square four years ago
and inspired the world, calling
for more openness, greater right
of dissent, greater right to
participate say it's
worse than ever.
Has the dream of Tahrir died?
ABDEL FATTAH EL-SISI
(through translator): Never.
The dream of Tahrir still holds.
And I want to tell you that
there is no Egyptian president
who can continue political
leadership against the will of
the Egyptians. This is a
fundamental
change now, only the
presidential term, one or two
terms, and the president has to
go.
This is the normal thing. And
this is a very good development
that Egypt is witnessing.
And it is going to be a
remarkable experience.
This is what I dream of. And
this is my determination and
political will. And this is what
I hope
for my country, that it can only
be ruled by the will, by the
will and the choice of
the Egyptians, not
against their free will.
MARGARET WARNER: Mr. President,
thank you very much.
ABDEL FATTAH EL-SISI: Thank
you very much, indeed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This past
weekend, the U.N. met to take
stock of the millennium promise
of guaranteeing a basic
education for all children by
2015.
In a message Saturday,
Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon
noted that, around the world, 59
million
children are not in school, and
250 million children are not
learning the basics.
Over the past 12 years, PBS has
been chronicling the education
of six children in separate
countries for WNET's
documentary "Time for School."
Tonight, we travel to the tiny
African country of Benin, where,
in 2003, one in four children
were out of school,
most of them girls.
NARRATOR: Nine-year old Nanavi
Todeenou (ph) lives in Koutagba,
a remote village in the
tiny West African country of
Benin, where voodoo was born.
Nanavi and her village are
participating in a nationwide
campaign to educate the girls
of Benin. The voodoo priest
calls for celebration because he
has just agreed to allow one
girl
from each family to attend
school, instead of being
initiated into the faith.
BALAKOU, Voodoo Priest (through
translator): I want Nanavi to go
to school. But all the
girls can never go to school.
There will always be those
who'll go to the convent. No one
can force me to release
all of them for school.
NARRATOR: Nearly half of the
girls in Benin have had no
formal education and often marry
very young.
WOMAN (through translator): Now
that your daughters are going to
school, aren't you
happy?
WOMAN (through translator):
You're not going to overwhelm
your daughters with all the
household
chores, are you?
NARRATOR: Regina Guedou has a
key role in Benin's girls
education initiative, traveling
from village to village on a
state-supported mission to
persuade parents of the value of
letting girls go to school.
REGINA GUEDOU, Benin (through
translator): If there are too
many illiterate people, the
country can't develop. We need
these children of tomorrow, so
that the country can change.
But this will be a long fight.
MAKDUE KOFFI ADAPKO, Benin
(through translator): The
changes that girls education
will bring
to the village are huge. The
girls who attend school learn
about hygiene. For instance,
she won't let her baby go
without vaccination against
diseases. She can help her
mother
count the money they
made at the market.
NARRATOR: The oldest of four
children, Nanavi is the biggest
help on the family's modest
farm. But for her mother, an
education was worth the
sacrifice.
WOMAN: (through translator): I
hope that she will become
something great, like a doctor.
If I had gone to school, I
would have had a better life.
NARRATOR: In 2005, Nanavi
suffered a tragic loss.
NANAVI, Benin (through
translator): When my father
died, I felt like dying too. He
used
to play with me. If I didn't
come back from school and it was
getting dark, my father
would pick me up in the village.
NARRATOR: Before passing,
Nanavi's father made one last
wish.
NANAVI (through translator): My
father told me to go to school
and not to rest.
This is my middle school. This
is the sixth grade. And this is
my classroom.
CLASS: Good morning, teacher.
NARRATOR: With the help of
Regina and the girls initiative,
Nanavi made it to middle
school, one of the select 11
percent of Benin's girls who
even make it this far.
TEACHER: OK, now, class,
look at it. Is it correct?
CLASS: Yes!
TEACHER: Is it correct?
TEACHER: Now you clap
for Nanavi, please.
MAN (through translator): I
believe that Nanavi can make it.
As we say, with a valiant heart,
nothing is impossible.
NANAVI (through translator): I
actually love being in middle
school. I want to be a doctor,
so I can give people shots. I
want to go to school until I
become something great.
My little boy's name is Adaou
Fortune (ph). He was born on May
28, 2015. He's 2 months
old.
NARRATOR: In 2010, Nanavi left
her village to go to boarding
school in the city, where
Regina and her mother believed
she would receive a better
education. But the demands of
her
new school overwhelmed her and
she wasn't able to keep up with
other students.
She moved to the capital,
Cotonou, to attend yet another
school and lived with her aunt
and uncle. But they physically
abused her, she says, so she ran
away before completing
the seventh grade.
She now lives in the city of
Bohicon, the third largest trade
center in Benin, and had
her son with Alphonse, an older
married man already the father
of four, who makes a living
building auto parts
out of rubber.
NANAVI (through translator): I
have to stay with him because we
already have a son together.
And I love him, too. I would've
preferred to stay in school.
School helped me a lot.
For example, if you don't go to
school, you can't read, you
can't speak French, and you
wouldn't be able to
study photography.
NARRATOR: No longer in school,
Nanavi is apprenticing at a
local photography studio, in the
hope
of being able to eventually
support her family.
NANAVI (through translator): Hi.
I'm training to be a
photographer. Mind if I take
your
picture?
RODRIGUE NOGI, Benin (through
translator): As soon as she
started, she was very dedicated
to the work. She's diligent. She
gave it her all. She definitely
has all the right qualities
to become a good reporter.
ALPHONSE ADAOU, Benin (through
translator): It's clear that she
really enjoys this work.
I have to help her. She has to
finish her apprenticeship. And
it will help support us.
NANAVI (through translator): It
pains me that I couldn't stay in
school, and that's why
my son will do what I wasn't
able to. He will study. He will
go further than I was able
to go.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you can watch
additional videos of the "Time
for School" documentary
project on WNET's Web site.
That's Thirteen.org.
Finally tonight: big
news from outer space.
NASA today announced that it has
found evidence of liquid water
on Mars, at least during certain
seasons of the Martian year. The
discovery was made through
satellite images, which revealed
darkly shaded streaks on slopes
of craters and hillsides. They
darken and lighten over
time as water seeps across the
surface, and then evaporates.
For more on what it all might
mean, I'm joined by science
correspondent Miles O'Brien.
Hello again.
MILES O'BRIEN: Judy,
good to see you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, how do they
know it's water, Miles? They
don't -- there hasn't been a
human
there to look at it. They're
looking through satellites. What
-- how do they know?
MILES O'BRIEN: The HiRISE
instrument, which is on the
orbiting Mars Reconnaissance
Orbiter,
is a very sophisticated
instrument and has the ability
to do spectral analysis.
So, it can actually look at how
light moves through whatever is
flowing there. And it
gives unique signatures of water
and in this case a lot of salt.
It's the salt that is
the key here, because Mars is
cold and has an atmosphere which
is almost nonexistent.
So, the idea of water flowing
there is hard to imagine.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But this flies in
the face of what scientists
thought for a long time,
or have they been
building up to this?
MILES O'BRIEN: Well, there is a
huge body of evidence that Mars
at one time was warm
and wet, and we think probably
a cushy birth for life.
So, we have been looking for
evidence of ancient life,
fossils, for example. There has
always
been this thought that maybe the
water is underneath in an
aquifer. Could it somehow
rise to the surface on certain
occasions in certain ways?
That's been a big question.
They first spotted these streaks
back in 2010. It sure looked
like water. But what would
keep it following? And the key
was, they found these
percolates, these salts in
there. It's
extremely salty water. Think of
why do -- how do we get snow off
our roads in the winter?
We use salt. Right?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
So, it's not the same. And let's
talk about these streaks. We
have got great images here
to look at.
MILES O'BRIEN:
They're spectacular.
And this is essentially a cliff.
And what you see is this --
those dark streaks are
the water, the briny water that
percolate in fused water flowing
downward. So, the question
is, where did the water come
from? Is it from an underground
aquifer?
It's kind of problematic,
because it's starting at the top
of the peak. That's unusual.
Could
it be somehow that there is a
humidity component to it? Mars
is very dry, but, under
certainly
circumstances, could there be
what amounts to kind of dew or
fog which is causing this?
We don't know the
answer to that yet.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you keep
using the word briny, very
salty, so it's not like the
water
we have on Earth?
MILES O'BRIEN: You wouldn't
want to drink it, for sure.
But because it's so filled with
the salt, it stays in liquid
form where it would otherwise
freeze. And so the key is, is it
so salty that it can support
life? That's the real
debate among
scientists right now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what do they
think? I mean, how are they
thinking about that?
MILES O'BRIEN: Well, flowing
water has been kind of the Holy
Grail on Mars, and because
wherever we look on this planet,
where we see liquid water, we
see life. It's a prerequisite
for life as we know it.
The question is, though, could
this be water that sustains
life? And could -- when you
think about salt, it was used as
a preservative for a long time
on voyages, because it kills
microbes. So, there might be so
much salt there that there is
nothing living there.
But where is the water coming
from, and could it be fresher
and could it thus sustain life?
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, how do they
do further investigation?
MILES O'BRIEN: Well, I think
it's going to beg for a mission,
you know?
And I think NASA will start
thinking about the architecture
for a mission. Let's go to
a place -- it's very difficult
to get there because it's on
these cliffs. How would you
gather up that water? Or would
it be smarter to try to find a
place where it's a little
more accessible, maybe go down
to the aquifer beneath, drill
down, and see if there are
some microscopic Martians
there. Who knows?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Who knows?
It's fascinating, Miles, but for
those people who are watching
and saying, how does it really
matter? There's water on Mars.
Are we ever really going to
really get there to find out?
MILES O'BRIEN: I think it's a
question worth asking. Are we
alone in the universe is a
good question.
And this -- we have looked at
our neighbor and we are getting
closer and closer by hunting
after the water to possibly
finding evidence of life,
ancient or maybe existing. And
how
exciting would that be? The next
second question is, though, is
it a second genesis? Or is
it -- Mars and Earth
have been swapping...
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Another
form of human...
MILES O'BRIEN: Exactly,
or we could be Martians.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Or we could
have come from there.
MILES O'BRIEN: Exactly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And this is
what Earth looked like.
MILES O'BRIEN: Exactly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But how excited
-- I read today that scientists
are debating. How excited
are they about this,
the folks you talk to?
MILES O'BRIEN: This is Holy
Grail kind of stuff. It's great
science.
It puts them in a space where
they can start making an
argument for missions that look
beneath the surface. And it's
what this steady stream of NASA
and European and other missions
to Mars have been all about,
following the water, kind of a
divining rod, if you will,
a high-tech divining rod, and
hoping at the end that the pot
of gold will be maybe
microscopic
life.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's just
extraordinary. I mean, the
pictures are extraordinary.
MILES O'BRIEN: Well, it
literally puts you in another
place, doesn't it? And it's
spectacular
to think we have the kind of
imagery that gets us that level
of detail on a satellite
that's been orbiting
that planet.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Miles O'Brien,
every time you come here, we
have another surprise.
MILES O'BRIEN: Yes. It's fun.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you.
MILES O'BRIEN: You're
welcome, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And speaking of
space, that brings us to our
"NewsHour" Shares of the
day, something that caught our
eye which might be of interest
to you, too.
From Russia to Paris to Las
Vegas, stargazers around the
world were treated to an
uncommon
astronomical event last evening:
a total lunar eclipse that
occurred during a rare so-called
supermoon. The phenomenon
happens when the sun, Earth and
moon perfectly align as the
moon's orbit brings it closest
to Earth. This made the moon
appear bigger and brighter than
usual.
And sunlight refracting around
the Earth bathed it in an eerie
reddish glow, giving it the
name blood moon. This double
feature has not occurred since
1982. And whether or not clouds
obscured your view, you will
have to wait until 2033 to see
it again.
Wow.
On the "NewsHour" online: For
many retirees, navigating the
Social Security system can
take all the peace out of
retirement. Luckily, we have our
benefits guru, Laurence
Kotlikoff,
as a guide. Today on Ask Larry,
he addresses widows and veterans
benefits. You can read
his advice, and submit your own
question, on our home page.
That's at PBS.org/NewsHour.
And tune in later tonight on
"Charlie Rose": more of his
exclusive interview with Russian
President Vladimir Putin.
And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
On Tuesday, Margaret Warner
continues her reporting from the
United Nations.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow evening. For all
of us at the "PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.